---
title: Project 4
layout: page
parent: Projects
nav_order: 4
---

# Project 4: Forward Kinematics
{: .no_toc }
Due at 10:30 AM on March 31
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

## Getting the Starter Code
Navigate to the directory where you would like to store the code for this project. Run the following commands to install the project starter code or download it manually [here](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/etrwf6zy7rsdp63xbak2e/Project4.tar.gz?rlkey=w0eu5wsgfet4gwgf4kri23ar8&st=zp3uegca&dl=0).
```bash
wget "https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/etrwf6zy7rsdp63xbak2e/Project4.tar.gz?rlkey=w0eu5wsgfet4gwgf4kri23ar8&st=zp3uegca&dl=0" -O p3.tar.gz
tar -xf p3.tar.gz
rm p3.tar.gz
```

It is *strongly* recommended to use GitHub to track the changes made to your project. First, create a new **private** repository in GitHub. Then, navigate to the project directory and run the following commands.
```bash
git init
git commit -m "first commit"
git branch -M main
git remote add origin [LINK TO REPO]
git push -u origin main
```
This will establish a main branch on the remote repository and add the starter code as the first commit.

## Learning Objectives
1. Understand representing robot geometry in text-based formats
2. Implement an interface for representing a robot manipulator as a kinematic chain
3. Create an interface for solving the forward kinematics for a robot manipulator
4. Create a program to publish synchronized joint states for a given robot description
5. Create a program to publish synchronized transforms for a given robot description
 
## Overview
This project will implement the `rixrdf` package. `rixrdf` contains interfaces for representing robot geometry in software and calculating the position of a robot's links given its configuration (joint positions). Additionally, you will create the joint state publisher (JSP) and robot state publisher (RSP) applications as RIX nodes. These are useful tools in robot systems which enable their subscribers to calculate the pose of any link in the description relative to the world frame or other links. Below is a description of the starter code.

### Starter Code
The following directories contain files that are dependencies for the `rixrdf` library and the `JSP` and `RSP` nodes.
- `eigen/`
    - The Eigen linear algebra library. `Eigen/Geometry` provides classes such as `Affine3d`, `Vector3d`, and `Quaterniond`.
- `json/`
    - The `nlohmann/Json` JSON parsing library. This is used by the `Tree` class to parse a robot description. You do not need to use this library in this project. You have already implemented the robot description parser in Lab 6.
- `lib/`
    - `rixutil`, `rixipc`, and `rixcore` packages precompiled as static libraries for CAEN. `rixcore` is the precompiled solution code from Project 3. Your node implementations will link against this library.

These directories contain files with TODOs. `rixrdf` is in `include/rix/rdf/` and `src/rix/rdf`.
- `include/rix`
    - `core/`
        - Headers for the `rixcore` classes, such as `Publisher`, `Subscriber`, and `Node`. You will use these in your node implementations.
    - `util/`
        - Interfaces for parsing command line arguments and logging data to `stdout`.
    - `ipc/`
        - Interfaces for nterprocess communication. You do not need to use this directly! `rixcore` depends on this.
    - `msg/`
        - Message types relevent to this project. `geometry/TF`, `sensor/JS`, and their dependencies are important! Please look over the member variables for these message types. You **do not** need to serialize/deserialize any messages in this project.
    - `rdf/`
        - **Headers for the `rixrdf` package that you will implement in this project.**
- `src/`
    - `rix/rdf`
        - **Source files for the `rixrdf` package that you will implmement in this project.**
    - **Source files for the joint state publisher and robot state publisher that you will implement in this project.**

These directories contain files related to testing or running your programs. 
- `robots/`
    - Robot description files.
- `bin/`
    - `rixhub` executable precompiled for CAEN.
- `googletest/`
    - GoogleTest testing framework.
- `test/`
    - `unit_tests/`
        - Public tests for the `Joint`, `Tree`, and `FKSolver` classes.
    - `manual_tests/`
        - Manual tests for the `JSP` and `RSP` nodes.
    - `bin`
        - Binary files with data to compare output for `JSP` and `RSP` nodes.

## 4.1 rixrdf
Implement the classes for representing a robot as a kinematic chain. 

### TODOs
1. `src/rix/rdf/joint.cpp`
    - Implement the `Joint::get_transform` function. This function should return the transform based on the current joint position and type.
2. `src/rix/rdf/tree.cpp`
    - Implmement the `Tree::TF` function. This should return a `TF` message based on the current configuration of the robot. This message should include the transform for every joint from its parent to its child link. The `Header::stamp` field of every `TransformStamped` should include the current time. `Header::frame_id` should be set to the name of the parent link. `TransformStamped::child` should be set to the name of the child link.
    - Implmement the `Tree::JS` function. This should return a `JS` message containing the joint positions of the robot. The `JS::stamp` field should include the current time. The `JS::joint_states` field should contain the name and position of every joint in the robot description.
    - Implement the `Tree::set_state` function. For each joint in the input `JS` message, set the state of the corresponding joint within the tree. If the joint does not exist, ignore it and optionally log a warning.
3. `src/rix/rdf/fk_solver.cpp` and `include/rix/rdf/fk_solver.hpp`.
    - Implement the `FKSolver::solve` functions. There are four overloads of `solve`. These functions require recursion! You can define private recursive helper functions in the `FKSolver` class in `include/rix/rdf/fk_solver.hpp`.
        1. `Eigen::Affine3d solve(const std::string &link_name)` returns the transform from the world frame to the `link_name` frame based on the current configuration of the tree passed into the constructor.
        2. `Eigen::Affine3d solve(const std::string &link_name, const std::string &reference_link)` returns the transform from the `reference_link` frame to the `link_name` frame based on the current configuration of the tree passed into the constructor.
        3. `static Eigen::Affine3d solve(const TF &tf, const std::string &link_name)` returns the transform from the world frame to the `link_name` frame based on the `TF` message passed into the function.
        4. `static Eigen::Affine3d solve(const TF &tf, const std::string &link_name, const std::string &reference_link)` returns the transform from the `reference_link` frame to the `link_name` frame based on the `TF` message passed into the function.
    - Implement the `FKSolver::global_tf` functions. There are two overloads of `global_tf`. These functions require recursion! You can define private recursive helper functions in the `FKSolver` class in `include/rix/rdf/fk_solver.hpp`.
        1. `TF global_tf() const` returns a `TF` message that contains transfroms from the world frame to the frame of each link based on the current configuration of the tree passed into the constructor.
        2. `static TF global_tf(const TF &tf) const` returns a `TF` message that contains transforms from the world frame to the frame of each link specified in the input `TF` message.

## 4.2 Joint State Publisher
Create a program to publish synchronized joint states for a given robot description specified by the command line argument `jrdf`. This program will subscribe to the topics specified by the command line argument `topics` and publish on the `joint_states` topic at a fixed rate specified by the command line option `rate`, which has a default value of 50 Hz. The message type of the topics `JSP` subscribes to and the topic it publishes to is `rix::msg::sensor::JS`. 

Each time a message is received on one of the subscribed topics, the joint positions from the messages should be saved in a container. This will occur in a separate thread from within a callback function specified to the subscriber. Ensure that you are protecting this container with the proper synchronization mechanism!

In the main thread of the program, use the `rix::util::Rate` class to publish all of the saved joint states at the specified frequency. Ensure that you set the `stamp` field of the `JS` message to the current time when you publish. You will need to read the joint state data from the container being written to by the callback functions. Ensure that you are protecting this container with the proper synchronization mechanism!

## 4.3 Robot State Publisher
Create a program to publish synchronized transforms for a given robot description specified by the command line argument `jrdf`. This program will subscribe to the `joint_states` topic (published to by `JSP`) and will publish at a **maximum** rate specified by the command line option `rate`. When a `JS` message is received, this program should update the configuration of the robot, generate a `TF` message, and publish it on the `tf` topic. 

The Robot State Publisher should implmement a rate limiting algorithm on the input messages. `RSP` should always publish at a frequency less than or equal to the maximum frequency. To ensure this, only calculate the TF and publish if the timestamp of the new message is at least a publish period greater than the least recently published joint of the message.

## Building
You can build the project with the following commands. You **must** build on CAEN. The libraries (`librixcore.a`, `librixipc.a`, and `librixutil.a`) were compiled for CAEN. This project *will not* build on your local machine.
```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

The unit test executables are `joint_test`, `tree_test`, and `fk_solver_test`.

The joint state publisher and robot state publisher executables are `jsp` and `rsp`.

The manual test executales are `jsp_simulator`, `joint_publisher`, `js_listener`, `tf_listener`, `js_recorder`, `tf_recorder`, `compare_jsp_test`, and `compare_rsp_test`.

## Testing
We have heard your feedback on providing public tests within the projects, so we have included some unit tests for you to test your `rixrdf` implementation. These tests are in `test/unit_tests`. 

There are also manual tests in `test/manual_tests` for `JSP` and `RSP`. The two tests are named `compare_jsp_test.cpp` and `compare_rsp_test.cpp`. The intention with these tests was to record `JS` and `TF` messages published by the `JSP` and `RSP` nodes when run in parallel with nodes that simulate joint positions. This recorded data can then be compared against the data recorded from the solution implementation. Instructions for replicating these tests are in the `compare_jsp_test.cpp` and `compare_rsp_test.cpp` files.